Adherence to due process requires that any litigations or cases be in adherence to established rules and laws of an organization. This is to ensure the fairness of case proceedings for both parties to a case. If an organization tasked with handling cases does not abide with the process of disciplinary proceedings as provided for by law, then there is no adherence to due process and may be grounds for the dismissal of a case.

Note that the exact provisions provided for by rules and regulations, or of by law, need be adhered to. A process cannot be substituted over another because case proceedings require adherence to the procedures of the provided law. *This is also known as **procedural due process**.*

Let us use the context of a Philippine case as an example. The Bureau of Internal Revenue is the administrative agency tasked with the assessment and collection of national internal revenue taxes in the Philippines. Assessment refers to determining the amount of taxes due owed by a taxpayer while collection refers to claiming the amount of taxes due owed by the taxpayer, whether in monies or in the form of properties. Before an assessment may take place, the Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR) shall adhere to the procedures provided for by law before a tax audit (a part of assessment) may take place.

A letter of notice (LN) is issued by the BIR if there are substantial discrepancies between the taxpayer’s filed return and to the amount of tax due that appears in the BIR’s internal systems. Meanwhile, a letter of authority (LOA) is issued by the BIR to conduct a tax audit and begin the process of assessment against a taxpayer.

In General Register (GR) No. 222743 of the Philippine Supreme Court, a letter of notice was issued by the BIR and necessitated the audit of the petitioner’s book of accounts without the issuance of a LOA, which, by law, is a crucial step in the assessment process of the BIR and forms part of the remedies granted to a taxpayer when disputing an assessment made. The Supreme Court ruled that the absence of a LOA violated the petitioner’s right to due process because the audit of a taxpayer’s books merely through the issuance of a LN is not valid. Even if discrepancies were noticed by the BIR in their systems, a LOA must still be issued to the taxpayer before conducting a tax audit on the taxpayer’s books because this is what is provided by law.

Another example, albeit theoretical, are the powers of the Commissioner of Internal Revenue (of the BIR) to investigate taxpayers. Included in this power is the issuance of subpoenas to acquire pieces of evidence ([[./Subpoena duces tecum|Subpoena duces tecum]]) or secure the testimony of an individual ([[./Subpoena ad testificandum|Subpoena ad testificandum]]). The Commissioner may not force an individual to produce pieces of evidence or acquire testimonies from a taxpayer without the issuance of a subpoena. The issuance of a subpoena generally requires compliance to relevant laws.

Another kind of due process is ***substantive due process***. This due process is concerned with the application of law- of how the law is to be created and executed to pursue the legitimate interests of an organization. In other words, laws must be enacted and executed that is compliant with the provisions of a basic law (such as the USG Constitution or the Philippine Constitution), deliberated thoroughly by a competent legislative organ. Let us use, again, Philippine context for this matter.

The General Appropriations Act (GAA) of the Philippine Government is a law granting the Executive Department[^1] to disburse funds as permitted by the Congress. The Philippine Congress holds the power of the purse- the power to permit the issuance of funds collected by its constituents for public use.

For the GAA FY 2025 of the Philippine Government, the Congress, through a bicameral conference, passed a law granting the Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH) the highest budget allocation. However, the provisions of the Philippine Constitution states that the government shall assign the highest budgetary priority to education and ensure that teaching will attract and retain its rightful share of the best available talents through adequate renumeration and other means of job satisfaction and fulfilment. The issue now lies on whether the Congress, in its power of purse, violated the provision of the Philippine Constitution by allotting budget to the DPWH higher than the agencies responsible for education (i.e., Department of Education, Commission on Higher Education).

As of time of writing, this matter is still pending in the Supreme Court. However, a relevant case, docketed as GR No. 94571, stated that the amount allotted for the Department of Education, Culture and Sports (previous name of the Department of Education) is the highest budgetary allocation among all department budgets. Thus, it follows that the Congress has complied with its constitutional mandate of providing highest priority of budget to education. Therefore, it can be construed to mean that, as held in GR No. 94571, that the term *highest budgetary priority* for Education, as provided for under the current 1987 Philippine Constitution, refers to the highest allotment of budget for a GAA. By applying substantive due process to the case, one may infer that the Congress, when passing the GAA for FY 2025, did not abide with the provisions of the current Philippine Constitution. Hence, a violation of substantive due process. Another possible violation relating to the case is the prohibition of the Congress to increase appropriations for line-items than those initially recommended by the President, which the Congress did, too. This would also be a possible violation of substantive due process.

---

[^1]: Generally; other departments may also be a recipient of the General Appropriations Act of the Philippine Government, such as that of the Judiciary Department.
