The following comparisons between tax against similar items may help:
* **vs Revenue**: Tax refers to the amount imposed, while revenue refers to the amount collected.
* **vs License**: Tax is used for raising revenues, while licenses are used to grant authority for an individual for the practice of a business or profession. Non-compliance to laws relating to licensures makes the practice illegal, but the non-payment of tax does not necessarily make it illegal. Tax also includes the power to license, but not the other way around. Further, it is imposed after activities have concluded, while licenses, before activities are done. Finally, tax is also exercised as a power of the government, while license is an exercise of police power.
* **vs Toll**: Tax is collected to support the government, and a demand of sovereignty. Meanwhile, toll is collected by a private owner for using their property.
* **vs Debt**: Tax is based on law, and may result to imprisonment for non-payment of tax ([[./PH Bill of Rights - Non-imprisonment for non-payment of debt or poll tax|except for poll tax]]). However, debt is based on contracts, and will not result to imprisonment for non-payment.
* **vs Special Assessment**: Tax is a general application and can be made a personal liability. However, a special assessment is imposed to a land owner as a result of improvement in land, oftentimes borne through the construction of public infrastructure such as highways. It is also exceptional as to the time and place of the improvements made, accrued to the land itself.
* **vs Tariff**: used interchangeably with the term *Custom Duties*, refers to a book of rates containing the names of merchandise with corresponding duties to be paid for goods imported or exported. However, custom duties is a form of *tax*, while the term tariff merely refers to the *book of rates*.
* **vs Penalty**: Penalties are used to regulate the conduct of the people, and may originate from either laws (such as the Penal Code) or contracts (penal clause on contracts if in default or non-fulfilment of obligation).
