We first discuss the two doctrines involving the power to tax, both stemming from landmark decisions by the Supreme Court of the United States of America.
* [[Marshall Dictum|Marshall Dictum]], in a landmark Supreme Court decision in the United States of America, stated that *the power to tax involves the power to destroy*. In the Philippine context, this dictum is used to justify the exercise of police power in discouraging certain acts and enterprises inimical to public welfare. Taxation is allowed to confiscate or destroy properties, but becomes unconstitutional if it is used in raising revenue.
* Meanwhile, the [[Holmes Doctrine|Holmes Doctrine]] holds that *the power to tax is the power to build*. This is contrary to the Marshall Dictum’s power to destroy in the exercise of power to tax.

While contradictory at first, G.R. No. 187485 attempts to shed some light into this matter. Thus read by a dissenting opinion by Justice Tinga:

> Taxes may be inherently punitive, but when the fine line between damage and destruction is crossed, the courts must step forth and cut the hangman's noose. Justice Holmes once confidently asserted that ‘the power to tax is not the power to destroy while this Court sits’ and we should very well live up to this expectation not only of the revered Holmes, but of the Filipino people who rely on this Court as the guardian of their rights. At stake is the right to exist and subsist despite taxes, which is encompassed in the due process clause.

## Other Taxation Doctrines
The following are also important doctrines relating to the State’s power to tax:
- **Doctrine of Judicial Non-interference**, or sometimes referred to as *judicial stability*, refers to the non-interference of courts within equal and coordinate jurisdiction. In the case of tax cases, since the Court of Tax Appeals has jurisdiction regarding this subject matter, has the right of injunction to restrict collection of a [[national tax|national tax]].
- **Imprescriptibly of Taxation**, wherein taxes are subject to a prescriptive period for assessment and collection. Examples include the action for claim of refund by a taxpayer, which prescribes after two-years. *If the action for it has already prescribed, the taxpayer may no longer raise a claim for taxes paid to the courts*.
- **Prospectivity of Tax Laws**, which states that generally, tax laws shall apply prospectively unless otherwise legislatively intended by express terms or by necessary implication. This is in resonance with Chapter 1 Article 4 of the New Civil Code, which states that *laws shall have no retroactive effect, unless the contrary is provided*.
- **Strictissimi Juris**, or *in accordance to the strictest interpretation of the law*, which is necessary if cases relating to interpretation of tax laws is raised before the Supreme Court. As a rule, taxes paid are liberally in favour of the taxpayer and construed against the government, but for tax exemptions, the contrary is true.
- ~~**Doctrine of Equitable Recoupment**~~ is a principle which allows a taxpayer, whose claim for refund has been barred due to prescription, to recover said tax by setting off the prescribed refund against a tax that may be due and collectible from them. However, the Philippine Supreme Court rejected this doctrine because it may work to tempt both parties to delay and neglect their respective pursuits of legal action within the period set by law. *This doctrine is inoperable, and the principle relating to ==imprescriptibly== apply*.
- ~~**Non-compensation or set-off rule**~~ is a principle where two persons, in their own right, are creditors and debtors to each other, and compensation may be applied for the settlement of pending obligation. *However, this doctrine, too, is inoperable* because (a) tax laws are governed by the National Internal Revenue Code and not the Civil Code; (b) tax is not a category of obligation; and (c) taxes are the lifeblood of the government, and hence, their speedy collection and availability are an imperious need.
- [[Doctrine of Estoppel|Doctrine of Estoppel]], which states that the State cannot be put in estoppel by mistakes or errors of its officials or agents. *This operates only in favour of the taxpayer*.
